# CIS 2520 F23 Assignment 3: Associative Arrays

We can think of a regular array as being a data structure that
associates keys with values, where the keys all have to be consecutive
integers starting at 0.

An "associative array" is a key/value store where we can access data
using keys of arbitrary types.

In this assignment, we are going to build an associative array tool
that is backed by a hash table.  We will implement this in a *library*.

## Library based design

When distributing code to clients or users, it is common to compile
our code and distribute it in a single file called a library, and
accompany this library with whatever header files are required to
access the library API (application programmer interface).

This follows the good practice of "information hiding" which ensures
that code that **should** not care about specific implementation
details **cannot** care about these details because they can't even
see them.

We will therefore compile our code into a library called `libaa.a`
(which stands for *library AA archive*).  This *library file*
will contain all the compiled code for our tool.

The commands to build this library are built into the `makefile`
for you.

This means that the "distributed" code from this project consists
of the library file `libaa.a` and its accompanying header file
`aarray.h`.  If you look in this header file, there is no sniff
of a discussion of "hash tables" as our user code has no need
to know that we are going to provide them with this implemetation
using hashing.

### The nuts and bolts

The actual work goes on inside the code in the `aalib` directory.

In this directory are the files you will work with for this project:

* `hashtools.h` -- a header file that does talk about hash tables, and
	provides the data types and tools that we will use in this assignment

* `hash-functions.c` -- a source file containing the implementations
	of the various hashing and probing functions we will use.  You will
	put your implementation of these functions in this file.

* `hash-table.c` -- a source file containing the actual work of operating
	the hash table: creating and destroying the table itself, and inserting,
	deleting and querying the table.

* `primes.c` -- a source file with a function to find a prime number for
	you.  This should be used to create your hashtable's memory allocation
	based on a prime number slightly larger than whatever size the user
	asked for.

### Your work

You are asked to complete the code in the `hash-functions.c` and `hash-table.c`
files, providing implementations for the various hashing and probing strategies
we have discussed, and using these to provide **insert**, **query** and **delete**
operations.

***Update (Oct 13):*** *The probing calls have been set up with a parameter
to report the cost of a given probe.  Please use this to compute how
many times the probe must iterate to do its work.  These cost values
will then be very useful to you when discussing how your own hashing
algorithm meets its goals when you are writing the `README` file
described below.*

#### Hash Algorithms

You have been provided an implementation of hashing by length (a simpleminded 
function that simply uses the length of the key as the hash value), and a stub
for hashing by summing bytes as we have discussed in class.

For this assignment you should design and implement an additional hashing strategy.
You will write this up in the `README.md` file, explaining your logic.  Remember
that your hashing strategy *must* be able to be used to locate your values based
on the same key, *should* be able to use all the space in the table, and *ideally*
should avoid creating clusters, as we discussed in the notes.


# User code testing

Code using the API described in `aarray.h` has been provided for you in `mainline.c`.

This code supports a number of operations.  Details on how to access these are
provided in the help text.

Key operations are:

* interpreting integer keys as binary integers -- this lets you build an associative
	array where the keys have a mixture of types, which is one of the most valuable
	attributes of this kind of tool
* exploring different sizes of storage table
* choosing the hashing and probing algorithms to use
* performing queries on your table
* deleting values from your table (before any query is performed)

Using these options will allow you to exercise your associative array to ensure that
it works robustly.


# Testing data

The file format for the data to load is simply lines using a tab character
as a divider between the key and the value.  If there is more than one tab
on a line, it is simply stored as part of the value.

If the key begins with a digit and the option to interpret integer keys as
binary integers is used, these are converted to binary ints and stored as
keys of length 4 bytes (sizeof(int)).

Query and deletion files are simply lists of keys, one per line.  The same
rule applies regarding integer values.


## Required output

Functions to print out your table are provided, and accessed from within
the `main()` function.



# Focus of the grading

Important factors in the grading include (in decreasing order of importance):

* **building correctly** using `make(1)`
	* Code that does not build using `make(1)` **on the linux.socs machines** will get no marks for functionality
		* Be sure to **test your code thoroughly** 
		* Running `make clean` followed by `make` will ensure a complete rebuild
* correctly loading and storing data using string and integer keys
* correctly querying values based on keys, including using your new hash algorithm
* your description of your hash algorithm in your README file (see below)
* correctly deleting values based on keys, including using your new hash algorithm
* having **no memory errors or leaks** when run using `valgrind(1)`
* providing **documentation** through a "`README.txt`" (or "`README.md`") file containing the following information:
	* Your name and student number
	* Any resource you used for assistance
	* The state of your implementation -- whether any functionality is missing or the assignment is complete
	* A summary of your new hashing algorithm, explaining whether and how it meets its *must*, *should* and *ideally* goals


